
      former of these cautions will be briefly suggested in its proper
      place, but it may be as well to state it, here, somewhat more at
      length. The art of Gibbon, or at least the unfair impression
      produced by his two memorable chapters, consists in his
      confounding together, in one indistinguishable mass, the  origin 
      and  apostolic  propagation of the new religion, with its  later 
      progress. No argument for the divine authority of Christianity
      has been urged with greater force, or traced with higher
      eloquence, than that deduced from its primary development,
      explicable on no other hypothesis than a heavenly origin, and
      from its rapid extension through great part of the Roman empire.
      But this argument-one, when confined within reasonable limits, of
      unanswerable force-becomes more feeble and disputable in
      proportion as it recedes from the birthplace, as it were, of the
      religion. The further Christianity advanced, the more causes
      purely human were enlisted in its favor; nor can it be doubted
      that those developed with such artful exclusiveness by Gibbon did
      concur most essentially to its establishment. It is in the
      Christian dispensation, as in the material world. In both it is
      as the great First Cause, that the Deity is most undeniably
      manifest. When once launched in regular motion upon the bosom of
      space, and endowed with all their properties and relations of
      weight and mutual attraction, the heavenly bodies appear to
      pursue their courses according to secondary laws, which account
      for all their sublime regularity. So Christianity proclaims its
      Divine Author chiefly in its first origin and development. When
      it had once received its impulse from above-when it had once been
      infused into the minds of its first teachers-when it had gained
      full possession of the reason and affections of the favored
      few-it  might be -and to the Protestant, the rationa Christian,
      it is impossible to define  when  it really  was -left to make
      its way by its native force, under the ordinary secret agencies
      of all-ruling Providence. The main question, the  divine origin
      of the religion , was dexterously eluded, or speciously conceded
      by Gibbon; his plan enabled him to commence his account, in most
      parts,  below the apostolic times;  and it was only by the
      strength of the dark coloring with which he brought out the
      failings and the follies of the succeeding ages, that a shadow of
      doubt and suspicion was thrown back upon the primitive period of
      Christianity.

      "The theologian," says Gibbon, "may indulge the pleasing task of
      describing religion as she descended from heaven, arrayed in her
      native purity; a more melancholy duty is imposed upon the
      historian -he must discover the inevitable mixture of error and
      corruption which she contracted in a long residence upon earth
      among a weak and degenerate race of beings." Divest this passage
      of the latent sarcasm betrayed by the subsequent tone of the
      whole disquisition, and it might commence a Christian history
      written in the most Christian spirit of candor. But as the
      historian, by seeming to respect, yet by dexterously confounding
      the limits of the sacred land, contrived to insinuate that it was
      an Utopia which had no existence but in the imagination of the
      theologian-as he  suggested  rather than affirmed that the days
      of Christian purity were a kind of poetic golden age;-so the
      theologian, by venturing too far into the domain of the
      historian, has been perpetually obliged to contest points on
      which he had little chance of victory-to deny facts established
      on unshaken evidence-and thence, to retire, if not with the shame
      of defeat, yet with but doubtful and imperfect success. Paley,
      with his intuitive sagacity, saw through the difficulty of
      answering Gibbon by the ordinary arts of controversy; his
      emphatic sentence, "Who can refute a sneer?" contains 